<html>
  <head>
<!--**************************************-->
<!--*    Generated from PreTeXt source   *-->
<!--*    on 2020-07-24T13:51:21-05:00    *-->
<!--*                                    *-->
<!--*      https://pretextbook.org       *-->
<!--*                                    *-->
<!--**************************************-->
<link href="../css/pretext-epub.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/></head>
  <body>
    <div class="hidden-content" style="display:none">\(\renewcommand{\labelitemi}{$\diamond$}
\def\arraystretch{1.5}
\newcommand{\contentsfinish}{}
\newcommand{\separator}{\begin{center}\rule{\columnwidth}{\arrayrulewidth}\end{center}}
\newcommand{\tosay}[1]{\begin{center}\text{\fbox{\scriptsize{#1}}}\end{center}}
\renewcommand{\cftsecfont}{}
\renewcommand{\cftsecpagefont}{}
\renewcommand{\descriptionlabel}[1]{\hspace{\labelsep}\smallcaps{#1}}
\def\oldequation{\equation}
\def\endoldequation{\endequation}
\newcommand{\nl}{
}
\newcommand{\runin}[1]{\textls[50]{\otherscshape #1}}
\renewcommand{\sectionmark}[1]{}
\renewcommand{\subsectionmark}[1]{}
\renewcommand{\sectionmark}[1]{\markboth{{\thesection}.\ \smallcaps{#1}}{\thesection.\ \smallcaps{#1}}}
\renewcommand{\subsectionmark}[1]{}
\renewcommand{\sectionmark}[1]{\markboth{{\scriptsize\thesection}.\ \smallcaps{#1}}{}}
\renewcommand{\subsectionmark}[1]{}
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0.5pt}
\newcommand{\makedefaultsection}[2][true]{
}
\newcommand{\timestamp}{{\color{red}Last updated: {\currenttime\ (UTC), \today}}}
\renewcommand{\le}{\leqslant}
\renewcommand{\leq}{\leqslant}
\renewcommand{\geq}{\geqslant}
\renewcommand{\ge}{\geqslant}
\newcommand{\ideal}[1]{\left\langle\, #1 \,\right\rangle}
\newcommand{\subgp}[1]{\left\langle\, #1 \,\right\rangle}
\def\p{\varphi}
\def\isomorphic{\cong}
\def\Gal{\text{Gal}}
\def\im{\text{im}}
\def\normal{\vartriangleleft}
\renewcommand{\qedsymbol}{$\checkmark$}
\def\lcm{{\text{lcm}\,}}
\newcommand{\q}[1]{{\color{red} {#1}}}
\newcommand{\startimportant}[1]{\end{[{Hint:} #1]\end}}
\renewcommand{\textcircled}[1]{\tikz[baseline=(char.base)]{\node[shape=circle,draw,inner sep=2pt,color=red] (char) {#1};}}
\newcommand{\crossout}[1]{\tikz[baseline=(char.base)]{\node[mynode, cross out,draw] (char) {#1};}}
\newcommand{\set}[1]{\left\{ {#1} \right\}}
\newcommand{\setof}[2]{{\left\{#1\,\colon\,#2\right\}}}
\def\C{{\mathbb C}}
\def\Z{{\mathbb Z}}
\def\bF{{\mathbb F}}
\def\Q{{\mathbb Q}}
\def\N{{\mathbb N}}
\def\R{{\mathbb R}}
\newcommand{\h}[1]{{\textbf{#1}}}
\def\presnotes{}
\newcommand{\lt}{&lt;}
\newcommand{\gt}{&gt;}
\newcommand{\amp}{&amp;}
\)</div>
    <section class="section" id="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers">
      <h2 class="heading hide-type"><span class="type">Section</span> <span class="codenumber">1.2</span> <span class="title">Divisibility and GCDs in the Integers</span></h2>
      <article class="assemblage assemblage-like" id="assemblage-4">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="title">Guiding Questions.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-55">In this section, we'll seek to answer the questions: <ul class="disc"><li id="li-10">What does it mean for one integer to divide another?</li><li id="li-11">What properties does divisibility enjoy in the integers?</li><li id="li-12">What is the greatest common divisor of two integers?</li><li id="li-13">How can we compute the greatest common divisor of two integers?</li></ul></p>
      </article>
      <section class="subsection" id="subsection-1">
        <h3 class="heading hide-type"><span class="type">Subsection</span> <span class="codenumber">1.2.1</span> <span class="title">Divisibility and the Division Algorithm</span></h3>
        <p id="p-56">In this section, we begin to explore some of the arithmetic and algebraic properties of \(\Z\text{.}\) We focus specifically on the divisibility and factorization properties of the integers, as these are the main focus of the text as a whole. One of the primary goals of this section is to formalize definitions that you are likely already familiar with and of which you have an intuitive understanding. At first, this might seem to unnecessarily complicate matters. However, it will become clear as we move forward that formal mathematical language and notation are necessary to extend these properties to a more abstract setting. We begin with a familiar notion.</p>
        <article class="definition definition-like" id="definition-3">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Definition</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.1</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-57">Let \(a,b\in \Z\text{.}\) We say that \(a\) <dfn class="terminology">divides</dfn> \(b\text{,}\) and write \(a\mid b\text{,}\) if there is an integer \(c\) such that \(ac = b\text{.}\) In this case, say that \(a\) and \(c\) are <dfn class="terminology">factors</dfn> of \(b\text{.}\) If no such \(c\in \Z\) exists, we write \(a\nmid b\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <p id="p-58">Note that the symbol \(|\) is a <em class="emphasis">verb</em>; it is therefore correct to say, e.g., \(2|4\text{,}\) as 2 <em class="emphasis">does</em> divide 4. However, it is an abuse of notation to say that \(2\mid 4 = 2\text{.}\) Instead, we likely mean \(4\div 2 = 2\) or \(\frac{4}{2} = 2\) (though we will not deal in fractions just yet).</p>
        <article class="investigation project-like" id="investigation-1">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Investigation</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.1</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-59">Determine whether \(a\mid b\) if:</p>
          <ol class="decimal">
            <li id="li-14">
              <p id="p-60">\(a = 3\text{,}\) \(b = -15\)</p>
            </li>
            <li id="li-15">
              <p id="p-61">\(a = 4\text{,}\) \(b = 18\)</p>
            </li>
            <li id="li-16">
              <p id="p-62">\(a = -7\text{,}\) \(b = 0\)</p>
            </li>
            <li id="li-17">
              <p id="p-63">\(a = 0\text{,}\) \(b = 0\)</p>
            </li>
          </ol>
          <p data-braille="continuation">Comment briefly on the results of this investigation. What did you notice? What do you still wonder?</p>
          <div class="solutions">
            <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-2">
              <span class="type">Solution</span>
              <p id="p-64">TBD.</p>
            </div>
          </div>
        </article>
        <p id="p-65">We next collect several standard results about divisibility in \(\Z\) which will be used extensively in the remainder of this text.</p>
        <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="theorem-4">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Theorem</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.2</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-66">Let \(a,b,c\in\Z\text{.}\) If \(a\mid b\) and \(a\mid c\text{,}\) then \(a\mid (b+c)\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <article class="proof" id="proof-4">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-67">Our hypothesis means that there exist integers \(k_1\) and \(k_2\) such that \(b = a k_1\) and \(c = a k_2\text{.}\) Then \(b+c = a k_1 + a k_2 = a(k_1 + k_2)\text{.}\) Let \(k' = k_1 + k_2\text{,}\) and observe that \(k'\) is an integer; then \(b+c = a k'\text{,}\) so \(a\mid (b+c)\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="thm-divideproduct">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Theorem</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.3</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-68">Let \(a,b,c\in\Z\text{.}\) If \(a\mid b\text{,}\) then \(a\mid bc\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <article class="proof" id="proof-5">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-69">Our hypotheses means there is an integer \(k\) for which \(b = ak\text{.}\) Then \(bc = (ak)c = a(kc)\text{.}\) We observe that \(k' = kc\) is an integer, so \(bc = ak'\text{,}\) and therefore \(a\mid bc\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <article class="investigation project-like" id="invest-divideproduct">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Investigation</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.2</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-70">Consider the following partial converse to <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#thm-divideproduct" class="internal" title="Theorem 1.2.3">Theorem 1.2.3</a>: If \(a,b,c\in\Z\) with \(a|bc\text{,}\) must \(a|b\) or \(a|c\text{?}\) Supply a proof or give a counterexample.</p>
          <div class="solutions">
            <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-3">
              <span class="type">Solution</span>
              <p id="p-71">The converse is false: \(6| 3\cdot 4\text{,}\) but \(6\nmid 3\) and \(6\nmid 4\text{.}\)</p>
            </div>
          </div>
        </article>
        <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="theorem_23lemmageneralization">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Theorem</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.4</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-72">Let \(a,b,c,d\in \Z\text{.}\) If \(a = b+c\) and \(d\) divides any two of \(a,b,c\text{,}\) then \(d\) divides the third.</p>
        </article>
        <article class="proof" id="proof-6">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-73">We consider two cases.</p>
          <p id="p-74"><em class="emphasis">Case 1:</em> Assume without loss of generality that \(d|a\) and \(d|b\text{.}\) Then there are integers \(k_1, k_2\) such that \(d k_1 = a\) and \(d k_2 = b\text{.}\) We observe that \(c = a - b = d k_1 - d k_2 = d(k_1 - k_2)\text{,}\) so \(d|c\text{.}\)</p>
          <p id="p-75"><em class="emphasis">Case 2:</em> Assume that \(d| b\) and \(d|c\text{,}\) so there are \(k_1,k_2\in \Z\) such that \(d k_1 = b\) and \(d k_2 = c\text{.}\) Then \(a = b+ c = dk_1 + dk_2 = d(k_1 + k_2)\text{,}\) so \(d|a\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <article class="investigation project-like" id="investigation-3">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Investigation</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.3</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-76">Formulate a conjecture akin to the previous theorems about divisibility in \(\Z\text{,}\) and then prove it.</p>
          <div class="solutions">
            <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-4">
              <span class="type">Solution</span>
              <p id="p-77">Answers vary.</p>
            </div>
          </div>
        </article>
        <p id="p-78">As we saw above, not all pairs of integers \(a,b\) satisfy \(a\mid b\) or \(b\mid a\text{.}\) However, <a class="external" href="http://www.corestandards.org/Math/Content/4/NBT/B/6/" target="_blank">our experience in elementary mathematics does apply: there is often something left over (a remainder)</a>. The following theorem formalizes this idea for \(a,b\in \N\text{.}\)</p>
        <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="thm_divalg">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Theorem</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.5</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="title">The Division Algorithm for \(\N\).</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-79">Let \(a,b\in \N\text{.}\) Then there exist unique integers \(q,r\) such that \(a = bq + r\text{,}\) where \(0 \le r \lt b\text{.}\)</p>
          <div class="hint solution-like" id="hint-1">
            <span class="type">Hint</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1</span>
            <p id="p-80">There are two parts to this theorem. First, you must establish that \(q\) and \(r\) exist. This is best done via <a href="SubSec-WellOrdering.xhtml#axiom_wellordering" class="internal" title="Axiom 1.1.2: Well-Ordering Principle">Axiom 1.1.2</a>. If you're stuck on that, check the second hint.</p>
            <p id="p-81">Once you have established that \(q\) and \(r\) exist, show that they are unique but assuming \(a = bq+r\) and \(a = bq' + r'\text{,}\) where \(r,r'\) both satisfy the conditions of the theorem. Argue that \(q = q'\) and \(r = r'\text{.}\)</p>
          </div>
          <div class="hint solution-like" id="hint-2">
            <span class="type">Hint</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">2</span>
            <p id="p-82">Let \(S = \setof{a-bs}{s\in \N_0, a-bs\ge 0}\text{.}\)</p>
          </div>
        </article>
        <article class="proof" id="proof-7">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-83">First, assume that \(a \lt b\text{.}\) Then \(q = 0\) and \(r = a\) are sufficient. If \(a = b\text{,}\) then \(q = 1\) and \(r = 0\) will work.</p>
          <p id="p-84">Now, assume that \(a &gt; b\text{.}\) Then the set \(S = \setof{s\in\N}{a-bs \ge 0}\) is nonempty, as \(a-b\in S\text{.}\) By <a href="SubSec-WellOrdering.xhtml#axiom_wellordering" class="internal" title="Axiom 1.1.2: Well-Ordering Principle">Axiom 1.1.2</a>, \(S\) has a least element, which we will call \(r\text{.}\) Let \(q\in \N_0\) be such that \(r = a-bq\text{;}\) then \(a = bq + r\text{.}\)</p>
          <p id="p-85">To finish the proof, it is enough to show that this choice of \(r\) satisfies \(0\le r \le b-1\text{.}\) Observe that \(r\in S\text{,}\) so \(r\ge 0\text{.}\) If \(r \ge b\text{,}\) then \(a - b(q+1) = a-bq -b = r -b \ge 0\text{.}\) Since \(q+1 &gt; q\text{,}\) this is a contradiction to the assumption that \(q\) was the largest element of \(S\text{.}\) Thus, \(r \lt b\text{,}\) i.e., \(r \le b-1\text{.}\)</p>
          <p id="p-86">Let \(q,q',r,r'\) be such that \(a = bq+r\) and \(a=bq'+r'\text{.}\) We see that \(bq+r = bq' + r'\text{,}\) so \(b(q-q') = r'-r\text{,}\) so \(b|r'-r\text{.}\) If \(r'-r = 0\text{,}\) we are done.</p>
          <p id="p-87">Otherwise, \(r'-r\) is a nonzero multiple of \(n\text{.}\) If \(r' \ge r\text{,}\) then \(0\le b(q-q') = r' - r \le b-1 - r\text{,}\) a contradiction. Similarly, if \(r' \le r\text{,}\) write \(b(q'-q) = r-r' \ge 0\text{,}\) and a symmetric argument leads to a contradiction.</p>
          <p id="p-88">Thus, \(r' = r\text{,}\) so \(b(q-q') = 0\text{,}\) and since \(b &gt; 0\text{,}\) \(q - q'= 0\text{,}\) i.e., \(q = q'\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <aside class="aside aside-like" id="aside-1">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="title">Warning!</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-89">This theorem has two parts: existence and uniqueness. Do not try to prove them both at the same time.</p>
        </aside>
        <p id="p-90">Unsurprisingly, the Division Algorithm also holds in \(\Z\text{,}\) though the existence of negative integers requires a careful restatement. </p>
        <article class="corollary theorem-like" id="corollary-1">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Corollary</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.6</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="title">The Division Algorithm for \(\Z\).</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-91">Let \(a,b\in \Z\) with \(b\ne 0\text{.}\) Then there exist unique integers \(q,r\) such that \(a = bq + r\text{,}\) where \(0 \le r \lt |b|\text{.}\)</p>
          <div class="hint solution-like" id="hint-3">
            <span class="type">Hint</span>
            <p id="p-92">Consider cases, and apply <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#thm_divalg" class="internal" title="Theorem 1.2.5: The Division Algorithm for \(\N\)">Theorem 1.2.5</a> wherever possible.</p>
          </div>
        </article>
        <article class="proof" id="proof-8">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-93">TBD.</p>
        </article>
      </section>
      <section class="subsubsection" id="subsubsection-1">
        <h3 class="heading hide-type"><span class="type">Subsubsection</span> <span class="codenumber">1.2.1</span> <span class="title">Greatest Common Divisors</span></h3>
        <p id="p-94">We next turn to another familiar property of the integers: the existence of greatest common divisors.</p>
        <article class="definition definition-like" id="gcd-definition">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Definition</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.7</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-95">Let \(a,b\in \Z\) such that \(a\) and \(b\) are not both 0. A <dfn class="terminology">greatest common divisor</dfn> of \(a\) and \(b\text{,}\) denoted \(\gcd(a,b)\text{,}\) is a natural number \(d\) satisfying</p>
          <ol class="decimal">
            <li id="li-18">
              <p id="p-96">\(d\mid a\) and \(d\mid b\)</p>
            </li>
            <li id="li-19">
              <p id="p-97">if \(e\in \N\) and \(e\mid a\) and \(e\mid b\text{,}\) then \(e\mid d\text{.}\)</p>
            </li>
          </ol>
          <p id="p-98">If \(\gcd(a,b) = 1\text{,}\) we say that \(a\) and \(b\) are <dfn class="terminology">relatively prime</dfn> or <dfn class="terminology">coprime</dfn>. <aside class="aside aside-like" id="aside-2">This formalizes the idea of greatest common factors that is introduced around <a class="external" href="http://www.corestandards.org/Math/Content/6/NS/B/4/" target="_blank">sixth grade</a>.</aside></p>
        </article>
        <p id="p-99">This definition may be different than the one you are used to, which likely stated that \(d \ge e\) rather than condition 2 in <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#gcd-definition" class="internal" title="Definition 1.2.7">Definition 1.2.7</a>. It can be proved using the order relations of \(\Z\) that the definition given here is equivalent to that one. However, we will prefer this definition, as it generalizes naturally to other number systems which do not have an order relation like \(\Z\text{.}\)</p>
        <article class="activity project-like" id="act-gcdcomputations">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Activity</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.4</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-100">Compute \(\gcd(a,b)\) if:</p>
          <ol class="decimal">
            <li id="li-20">
              <p id="p-101">\(a = 123\text{,}\) \(b = 141\)</p>
            </li>
            <li id="li-21">
              <p id="p-102">\(a = 0\text{,}\) \(b = 169\)</p>
            </li>
            <li id="li-22">
              <p id="p-103">\(a= 85\text{,}\) \(b = 48\)</p>
            </li>
          </ol>
          <p data-braille="continuation">Now that you have had a bit of practice computing gcds, describe your method for finding them in a sentence or two.</p>
          <div class="solutions">
            <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-5">
              <span class="type">Solution</span>
              <p id="p-104">TBD.</p>
            </div>
          </div>
        </article>
        <p id="p-105">How did you answer the last question in <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#act-gcdcomputations" class="internal" title="Activity 1.2.4">Activity 1.2.4</a>? If you are like the authors' classes, the answers probably varied, though you have referred at some point to a "prime" (<a href="SubSec-Primes-and-Factorization.xhtml#def-primeinteger" class="internal" title="Definition 1.3.1">whatever those are</a>), or possibly some other ad hoc method for finding the gcd. Most such methods rely in some form on our ability to factor integers. However, the problem of factoring arbitrary integers is actually surprisingly computationally intensive. Thankfully, there is another way to compute \(\gcd(a,b)\text{,}\) to which we now turn.</p>
        <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="theorem-8">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Theorem</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.8</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-106">Let \(a,b,c\in\Z\) such that \(a = b+c\) with \(a\) and \(b\) not both zero. Then \(\gcd(a,b) = \gcd(b,c)\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <article class="proof" id="proof-9">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-107">Let \(d = \gcd(a,b)\) and \(e = \gcd(b,c)\text{.}\) Since \(d|a\) and \(d|b\text{,}\) \(d|c\text{,}\) and so \(d|e\) by definition.</p>
          <p id="p-108">Similarly, since \(e|b\) and \(e|c\text{,}\) \(e|a\text{,}\) so \(e|d\) by definition.</p>
          <p id="p-109">Thus, \(e = d\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <article class="investigation project-like" id="invest_gcdremainder">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Investigation</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.5</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-110">Suppose \(a,b,c\in\Z\) such that there exists \(q\in\Z\) with \(a = bq + c\) and \(a\) and \(b\) not both zero. Prove or disprove: \(\gcd(a,b)=\gcd(a,c)\text{.}\)</p>
          <div class="solutions">
            <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-6"><span class="type">Solution</span>TBD.</div>
          </div>
        </article>
        <article class="investigation project-like" id="invest-euclid-alg-integers">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Investigation</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.6</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="title">(Euclidean Algorithm).</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-111">Let \(a,b\in \N\text{.}\) Use <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#thm_divalg" class="internal" title="Theorem 1.2.5: The Division Algorithm for \(\N\)">Theorem 1.2.5</a> and <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#invest_gcdremainder" class="internal" title="Investigation 1.2.5">Investigation 1.2.5</a> to determine an algorithm for computing \(\gcd(a,b)\text{.}\) How could your method be modified to compute \(\gcd(a,b)\) for \(a,b\in\Z\text{?}\)</p>
          <div class="solutions">
            <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-7">
              <span class="type">Solution</span>
              <p id="p-112">Let \(a,b\in \N\text{.}\) Write \(a = bq_1+r_1\text{.}\) By <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#invest_gcdremainder" class="internal" title="Investigation 1.2.5">Theorem 1.2.5</a>, \(\gcd(a,b) = \gcd(b,r_1)\text{.}\)</p>
              <p id="p-113">Then, write \(b = r_1 q_2 + r_2\) using the Division algorithm. Observe \(\gcd(b,r_1) = \gcd(r_1,r_2)\text{.}\) Continue until there is a \(k\) for which \(r_k = 0\text{,}\) so \(\gcd(r_k,r_{k-1}) = r_{k-1}\text{.}\) Then \(r_{k-1}= \gcd(r_k, r_{k-1}) = \gcd(r_{k-1},r_{k-2}) = \cdots = \gcd(a,b)\text{.}\)</p>
            </div>
          </div>
        </article>
        <article class="activity project-like" id="activity-2">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Activity</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.7</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-114">Use the Euclidean algorithm to compute \(\gcd(18489,17304)\text{.}\)</p>
          <div class="solutions">
            <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-8">
              <span class="type">Solution</span>
              <p id="p-115">We write</p>
              <div class="displaymath">
\begin{align*}
18489 \amp = 17304 \cdot 1 +1185\\
17304 \amp = 1185\cdot 14 +714\\
1185 \amp = 714 \cdot 1 + 471\\
714 \amp = 471 \cdot 1+ 243\\
471 \amp = 243\cdot 1 + 228\\
243 \amp = 228 \cdot 1+ 15\\
228 \amp = 15 \cdot 15 + 3\\
15 \amp = 3\cdot 5 + 0\text{.}
\end{align*}
</div>
              <p id="p-116">So \(\gcd(18489,17304)=3\text{.}\)</p>
            </div>
          </div>
        </article>
        <p id="p-117">The following identity provides a useful characterization of the greatest common divisor of two integers, not both zero. We will return to this idea several times, even after we have left the familiar realm of the integers.</p>
        <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="theorem_bezoutint">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Theorem</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.9</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="title">Bézout's Identity.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-118">For any integers \(a\) and \(b\) not both 0, there are integers \(x\) and \(y\) such that</p>
          <div class="displaymath">
\begin{equation*}
ax + by = \gcd(a,b)\text{.}
\end{equation*}
</div>
          <div class="hint solution-like" id="hint-4">
            <span class="type">Hint</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1</span>
            <p id="p-119">Apply <a href="SubSec-WellOrdering.xhtml#axiom_wellordering" class="internal" title="Axiom 1.1.2: Well-Ordering Principle">Axiom 1.1.2</a> to a well-chosen set.</p>
          </div>
          <div class="hint solution-like" id="hint-5">
            <span class="type">Hint</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">2</span>
            <p id="p-120">Apply <a href="SubSec-WellOrdering.xhtml#axiom_wellordering" class="internal" title="Axiom 1.1.2: Well-Ordering Principle">Axiom 1.1.2</a> to \(S = \setof{as+bt}{s,t\in\Z, \ as+bt \gt 0}\text{.}\)</p>
          </div>
        </article>
        <article class="proof" id="proof-10">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-121">Consider the set \(S = \setof{as+bt}{s,t\in\Z, \ as+bt \gt 0}\text{.}\) We first show that \(S\ne \emptyset\text{.}\)</p>
          <p id="p-122">Suppose without loss of generality that \(a\ne 0\text{,}\) and consider \(a \gt 0\text{;}\) then \(s=1, t = 0\) is sufficient to guarantee \(as+bt\in S\text{.}\) If \(a \lt 0\text{,}\) then \(s = -1, t= 0\) is sufficient. Regardless, \(S\ne \emptyset\text{,}\) and by the Well-Ordering Principle, \(S\) has a least element, \(d = ax+by\text{.}\) We claim \(d = \gcd(a,b)\text{.}\)</p>
          <p id="p-123">We first show that \(d|a\) Use the division algorithm to write \(a = dq + r\text{,}\) where \(r \lt d\text{.}\) We find \(r = a - dq = a - (ax+by)q = a(1-xq) + by\text{,}\) and if \(r\gt 0\text{,}\) \(r\in S\text{,}\) contradicting the status of \(d\) as the least element of \(S\text{.}\) Thus, \(r = 0\text{,}\) and \(d|a\text{.}\) By a symmetric proof, \(d|b\text{.}\)</p>
          <p id="p-124">Suppose then that \(e\) is a common divisor of \(a\) and \(b\text{;}\) write \(a = e k_1\) and \(b = e k_2\text{.}\) Then \(d = ax + by = (ek_1)x + (ek_2)y = e(k_1x + k_2 y)\text{,}\) whence \(e|d\text{.}\) Therefore, \(d = \gcd(a,b)\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <p id="p-125">We conclude with an answer to the questions raised by <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#invest-divideproduct" class="internal" title="Investigation 1.2.2">Investigation 1.2.2</a>.</p>
        <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="theorem_relprimecancel">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Theorem</span>
            <span class="space"> </span>
            <span class="codenumber">1.2.10</span>
            <span class="period">.</span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-126">Let \(a, b\text{,}\) and \(c\) be integers. If \(a|bc\) and \(\gcd(a,b) = 1\text{,}\) then \(a|c\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
        <article class="proof" id="proof-11">
          <h6 class="heading">
            <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
          </h6>
          <p id="p-127">Suppose \(\gcd(a,b) = 1\text{.}\) By <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#theorem_bezoutint" class="internal" title="Theorem 1.2.9: Bézout's Identity">Theorem 1.2.9</a>, there are integers \(x\) and \(y\) such that</p>
          <div class="displaymath">
\begin{equation*}
ax+by = 1\text{.}
\end{equation*}
</div>
          <p id="p-128">Multiply by \(c\) to get</p>
          <div class="displaymath">
\begin{equation*}
acx + bcy = c\text{.}
\end{equation*}
</div>
          <p id="p-129">Since \(a|bc\) by assumption, there is an integer \(k\) such that \(ak = bc\text{,}\) so we have</p>
          <div class="displaymath">
\begin{equation*}
acx + bcy = acx + aky = a(cx+ky) = c\text{,}
\end{equation*}
</div>
          <p data-braille="continuation">so \(a|c\text{.}\)</p>
        </article>
      </section>
      <section class="conclusion" id="conclusion-1">
        <p id="p-130">In this section, we have collected some initial results about divisibility in the integers. We'll next explore the multiplicative building blocks of the integers, the primes, in preparation for a deeper exploration of factorization.</p>
      </section>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>
