<html>
  <head>
<!--**************************************-->
<!--*    Generated from PreTeXt source   *-->
<!--*    on 2020-07-24T13:51:22-05:00    *-->
<!--*                                    *-->
<!--*      https://pretextbook.org       *-->
<!--*                                    *-->
<!--**************************************-->
<link href="../css/pretext-epub.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/></head>
  <body>
    <div class="hidden-content" style="display:none">\(\renewcommand{\labelitemi}{$\diamond$}
\def\arraystretch{1.5}
\newcommand{\contentsfinish}{}
\newcommand{\separator}{\begin{center}\rule{\columnwidth}{\arrayrulewidth}\end{center}}
\newcommand{\tosay}[1]{\begin{center}\text{\fbox{\scriptsize{#1}}}\end{center}}
\renewcommand{\cftsecfont}{}
\renewcommand{\cftsecpagefont}{}
\renewcommand{\descriptionlabel}[1]{\hspace{\labelsep}\smallcaps{#1}}
\def\oldequation{\equation}
\def\endoldequation{\endequation}
\newcommand{\nl}{
}
\newcommand{\runin}[1]{\textls[50]{\otherscshape #1}}
\renewcommand{\sectionmark}[1]{}
\renewcommand{\subsectionmark}[1]{}
\renewcommand{\sectionmark}[1]{\markboth{{\thesection}.\ \smallcaps{#1}}{\thesection.\ \smallcaps{#1}}}
\renewcommand{\subsectionmark}[1]{}
\renewcommand{\sectionmark}[1]{\markboth{{\scriptsize\thesection}.\ \smallcaps{#1}}{}}
\renewcommand{\subsectionmark}[1]{}
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0.5pt}
\newcommand{\makedefaultsection}[2][true]{
}
\newcommand{\timestamp}{{\color{red}Last updated: {\currenttime\ (UTC), \today}}}
\renewcommand{\le}{\leqslant}
\renewcommand{\leq}{\leqslant}
\renewcommand{\geq}{\geqslant}
\renewcommand{\ge}{\geqslant}
\newcommand{\ideal}[1]{\left\langle\, #1 \,\right\rangle}
\newcommand{\subgp}[1]{\left\langle\, #1 \,\right\rangle}
\def\p{\varphi}
\def\isomorphic{\cong}
\def\Gal{\text{Gal}}
\def\im{\text{im}}
\def\normal{\vartriangleleft}
\renewcommand{\qedsymbol}{$\checkmark$}
\def\lcm{{\text{lcm}\,}}
\newcommand{\q}[1]{{\color{red} {#1}}}
\newcommand{\startimportant}[1]{\end{[{Hint:} #1]\end}}
\renewcommand{\textcircled}[1]{\tikz[baseline=(char.base)]{\node[shape=circle,draw,inner sep=2pt,color=red] (char) {#1};}}
\newcommand{\crossout}[1]{\tikz[baseline=(char.base)]{\node[mynode, cross out,draw] (char) {#1};}}
\newcommand{\set}[1]{\left\{ {#1} \right\}}
\newcommand{\setof}[2]{{\left\{#1\,\colon\,#2\right\}}}
\def\C{{\mathbb C}}
\def\Z{{\mathbb Z}}
\def\bF{{\mathbb F}}
\def\Q{{\mathbb Q}}
\def\N{{\mathbb N}}
\def\R{{\mathbb R}}
\newcommand{\h}[1]{{\textbf{#1}}}
\def\presnotes{}
\newcommand{\lt}{&lt;}
\newcommand{\gt}{&gt;}
\newcommand{\amp}{&amp;}
\)</div>
    <section class="section" id="SubSec-Factoring-Polynomials">
      <h2 class="heading hide-type"><span class="type">Section</span> <span class="codenumber">3.1</span> <span class="title">Factoring Polynomials</span></h2>
      <article class="assemblage assemblage-like" id="assemblage-13">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="title">Guiding Questions.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-543">In this section, we'll seek to answer the questions: <ul class="disc"><li id="li-162">What properties of divisibility in \(\Z\) extend to \(F[x]\text{?}\)</li><li id="li-163">What is an irreducible polynomial? Are there any tools we can use to determine if a given polynomial is irreducible?</li></ul></p>
      </article>
      <p id="p-544">One of the most beautiful consequences of an abstract study of algebra is the fact that both \(\Z\) and \(F[x]\) are Euclidean domains. While they are not “the same”, we can expect them to share many of the same properties. In this section, our first goal will be to extend familiar properties from \(\Z\) to \(F[x]\text{.}\) We will also see that particular features of a polynomial (e.g., its degree, or the existence of roots) allows for additional criteria for its irreducibility to be decided.</p>
      <p id="p-545">Since both \(\Z\) and \(F[x]\) have a division algorithm, it is reasonable to expect that, similar to the integers, we can also investigate the greatest common divisor of polynomials. In fact, <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#invest-euclid-alg-integers" class="internal" title="Investigation 1.2.6: (Euclidean Algorithm)">our method</a> for finding the greatest common divisor of two integers extends nicely to polynomials.</p>
      <article class="investigation project-like" id="investigation-22">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Investigation</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.1</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-546">Given \(f(x),g(x)\in F[x]\text{,}\) state a conjecture that gives a means for finding \(\gcd(f(x),g(x))\text{.}\) Prove your conjecture is correct.</p>
        <div class="solutions">
          <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-24">
            <span class="type">Solution</span>
            <p id="p-547">The Euclidean algorithm! Apply the division algorithm for polynomials and mimic the proof of the Euclidean algorithm in \(\Z\text{.}\)</p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </article>
      <article class="investigation project-like" id="investigation-23">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Investigation</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.2</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-548">Carefully state and prove a Bézout-like theorem (recall <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-the-Integers.xhtml#theorem_bezoutint" class="internal" title="Theorem 1.2.9: Bézout's Identity">Theorem 1.2.9</a>) for polynomials in \(F[x]\text{.}\)</p>
        <div class="solutions">
          <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-25">
            <span class="type">Solution</span>
            <p id="p-549">Let \(f(x),
g(x)\in F[x]\) such that \(f\) and \(g\) are not both the zero polynomial. Then there exist polynomials \(s(x),
t(x)\in F[x]\) such that \(f(x) s(x) + g(x) t(x) = \gcd(f(x),g(x))\text{.}\)</p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </article>
      <p id="p-550">One of the most useful things we can do with polynomials is <em class="emphasis">evaluate</em> them by “plugging in” elements from our coefficient set (or some superset that contains it) and performing the resulting arithmetic in an appropriate ring. We can make this completely rigorous using the language of functions: given a commutative ring \(R\) and all polynomials \(p(x) = a_0 + a_1 x + \cdots + a_n x^n \in R[x]\text{,}\) we define the function \(p_f : R\to R\) by \(p_f(r) = a_0 + a_1 r + \cdots + a_n r^n \text{.}\) However, we will not belabor this point; instead, we will generally write \(p(r)\) in place of \(p_f(r)\) and appeal to our common notions of evaluating polynomials.</p>
      <p id="p-551">Given a polynomial \(p(x)\in R[x]\text{,}\) we have frequently been interested in finding all \(r\in R\) for which \(p(r) = 0\text{.}\)</p>
      <article class="definition definition-like" id="definition-29">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Definition</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.1</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-552">Let \(R\) be commutative with identity and suppose \(p(x) \in R[x]\text{.}\) We say \(r\in R\) is a <dfn class="terminology">zero</dfn> or <dfn class="terminology">root</dfn> of \(p(x)\) if \(p(r) = 0\text{.}\)</p>
      </article>
      <p id="p-553">When considering polynomials with integer coefficients, any rational roots are particularly well-behaved.</p>
      <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="thm-rational-root">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Theorem</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.2</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-554">Let \(p(x) = a_0 + a_1 x + a_2 x^2 + \cdots + a_n x^n \in \Z[x]\) with \(a_0,a_n\ne 0\text{.}\) If \(r,s\in\Z\) such that \(s\ne 0, \gcd(r,s)=1\text{,}\) and \(p(r/s)=0\text{,}\) then \(r|a_0\) and \(s|a_n\text{.}\)</p>
      </article>
      <article class="proof" id="proof-49"><h6 class="heading"><span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span></h6>TBD.</article>
      <article class="activity project-like" id="activity-13">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Activity</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.3</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-555">Use <a href="SubSec-Factoring-Polynomials.xhtml#thm-rational-root" class="internal" title="Theorem 3.1.2">Theorem 3.1.2</a> to find the <em class="emphasis">possible</em> rational roots of \(p(x) = 3 - x + x^2 + 5x^3 - 10x^4 - 6x^5\text{.}\) Which of the possibilities you found are actually roots? Justify.</p>
        <div class="solutions">
          <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-26">
            <span class="type">Solution</span>
            <p id="p-556">TBD.</p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </article>
      <p id="p-557"><a href="SubSec-Factoring-Polynomials.xhtml#thm-rational-root" class="internal" title="Theorem 3.1.2">Theorem 3.1.2</a> gave a condition to check to see if polynomials in \(\Z[x]\) had roots in \(\Q\text{.}\) However, the lack of a rational root for a polynomial \(q(x)\in \Z[x]\) is not sufficient to say that a polynomial is irreducible in \(\Z[x]\) according to <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-Domains.xhtml#def_irreducibleelement" class="internal" title="Definition 2.3.4">Definition 2.3.4</a>.</p>
      <article class="activity project-like" id="activity-14">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Activity</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.4</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-558">Find a polynomial \(q(x) \in \Z[x]\) that has no roots in \(\Q\) but is nonetheless reducible <em class="emphasis">over \(\Z\)</em>.</p>
        <div class="solutions">
          <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-27">
            <span class="type">Solution</span>
            <p id="p-559">Any polynomial with a nonunit integer factor will do, such as \(q(x) = 4x^2 + 2\text{.}\)</p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </article>
      <p id="p-560">To simplify matters, we will focus henceforth on polynomials with coefficients in a field. The following theorem is <a class="external" href="http://www.corestandards.org/Math/Content/HSA/APR/B/2/" target="_blank">a result that you learned in high school algebra</a> (and have likely used countless times since then), but as with the other familiar topics we have explored so far, it is necessary to formalize prior to continuing.</p>
      <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="theorem-46">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Theorem</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.3</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="title">Factor Theorem.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-561">Let \(F\) be a field, and \(p(x)\in F[x]\text{.}\) Then \(\alpha\in F\) is a root of \(p(x)\) if and only if \(x-\alpha\) divides \(p(x)\text{.}\)</p>
      </article>
      <article class="proof" id="proof-50">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-562">If \(x-\alpha\) divides \(p(x)\text{,}\) then \(p(x) = q(x) (x-\alpha)\) and \(p(\alpha) = q(\alpha) (\alpha - \alpha) = 0\text{,}\) so \(\alpha\) is a root.</p>
        <p id="p-563">Otherwise, use the division algorithm to divide \(p(x)\) by \(x-\alpha\text{.}\) Then \(p(x) = q(x)(x-\alpha) + r\text{,}\) where \(\deg r \lt \deg (x-\alpha) = 1\text{.}\) Thus, \(r\) is a nonzero constant. If \(\alpha\) is a root of \(p\text{,}\) then \(0 = p(\alpha) = q(\alpha) (\alpha - \alpha) + r = 0 + r = r\text{,}\) so \(r=0\) and \(x-\alpha | p(x)\text{.}\)</p>
      </article>
      <p id="p-564">Note that while \(F[x]\) is a ring, and we already have a <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-Domains.xhtml#def_irreducibleelement" class="internal" title="Definition 2.3.4">definition of an irreducible element of a ring</a>, we will find it useful to have a ready definition of irreducible in the context of polynomials with coefficients in a field. It is to that task that we now turn.</p>
      <article class="exploration project-like" id="exploration-19">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Exploration</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.5</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-565">Given a field \(F\text{,}\) define an irreducible element of \(F[x]\text{,}\) keeping in view <a href="SubSec-Rings.xhtml#theorem_degreeofproductinfield" class="internal" title="Theorem 2.2.20">Theorem 2.2.20</a> and <a href="SubSec-Divisibility-in-Domains.xhtml#def_irreducibleelement" class="internal" title="Definition 2.3.4">Definition 2.3.4</a>. <div class="hint solution-like" id="hint-13"><span class="type">Hint</span>What are the units in \(F[x]\text{?}\)</div></p>
        <div class="solutions">
          <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-28">
            <span class="type">Solution</span>
            <p id="p-566">An irreducible polynomial is a nonzero nonconstant \(p(x)\in F[x]\) such that whenever \(p(x) = a(x) b(x)\text{,}\) where \(a(x), b(x) \in F[x]\text{,}\) either \(a(x)\) or \(b(x)\) is a nonzero constant.</p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </article>
      <article class="definition definition-like" id="definition-30">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Definition</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.4</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-567">A polynomial \(f(x)\in F[x]\) is <dfn class="terminology">reducible</dfn> if it is not irreducible.</p>
      </article>
      <article class="exploration project-like" id="exploration-20">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Exploration</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.6</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-568">State a positive definition for a reducible polynomial with coefficients in a field \(F\text{.}\) That is, state a definition which does not refer to the notion of irreducibility.</p>
        <div class="solutions">
          <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-29">
            <span class="type">Solution</span>
            <p id="p-569">A polynomial \(r(x)\) is reducible if it can be written as \(r(x) = s(x) t(x)\text{,}\) where \(1 \le \deg s(x) \lt \deg r(x)\) and \(1 \le \deg t(x) \lt \deg r(x)\text{.}\)</p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </article>
      <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="theorem-47">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Theorem</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.5</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-570">Every polynomial of degree 1 in \(F[x]\) is irreducible.</p>
      </article>
      <article class="proof" id="proof-51">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-571">Let \(f(x)\) be degree 1 and write \(f(x) = s(x) t(x)\text{.}\) Then \(\deg f = 1 = \deg s + \deg t\text{.}\) Since \(\deg s, \deg t \ge 0\text{,}\) one of \(\deg s\) or \(\deg t\) is 0, hence \(s\) or \(t\) is constant.</p>
      </article>
      <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="theorem-48">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Theorem</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.6</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-572">A nonconstant polynomial \(f(x)\in F[x]\) of degree 2 or 3 is irreducible over \(F\) if and only if it has no zeros in \(F\text{.}\)</p>
      </article>
      <article class="proof" id="proof-52">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-573">We prove the double contrapositive: \(f(x)\in F[x]\) of degree 2 or 3 is reducible if and only if it has a zero in \(F\text{.}\)</p>
        <p id="p-574">If \(f(x)\) is reducible there exist nonconstant \(s(x),t(x)\in F[x]\) such that \(f(x) = s(x) t(x)\text{.}\) Since \(\deg f = 2\) or 3, one of \(s(x)\) or \(t(x)\) has degree 1, and is thus of the form \(x-\alpha\text{,}\) where \(\alpha \in F\text{.}\) Thus, \(f\) has a zero.</p>
        <p id="p-575">Similarly, if \(f\) has a zero \(\alpha\in F\text{,}\) \(f(x) = (x-\alpha)g(x)\text{,}\) where \(\deg g \ge 1\text{.}\) Thus, \(f\) is reducible over \(F\text{.}\)</p>
      </article>
      <p id="p-576">The preceding theorems allow us to explore the (ir)reducibility of polynomials of small degree with coefficients in <em class="emphasis">any field</em>.</p>
      <article class="activity project-like" id="activity-15">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Activity</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.7</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-577">Determine which of the following polynomials are irreducible over the given fields. Justify your answer.</p>
        <ol class="decimal">
          <li id="li-164">
            <p id="p-578">Over \(\Z_2\text{:}\)</p>
            <ol class="lower-alpha">
              <li id="li-165">\(x^2 + 1\text{,}\)</li>
              <li id="li-166">\(x^2 + x\text{,}\)</li>
              <li id="li-167">\(x^2 +x +1\text{,}\)</li>
              <li id="li-168">\(x^3 + x^2 + 1\text{,}\)</li>
              <li id="li-169">\(x^4 + x^2 + 1\text{.}\)</li>
            </ol>
          </li>
          <li id="li-170">
            <p id="p-579">Over \(\Z_3\text{:}\)</p>
            <ol class="lower-alpha">
              <li id="li-171">\(x^2 + 1\text{,}\)</li>
              <li id="li-172">\(x^2 + x\text{,}\)</li>
              <li id="li-173">\(x^2 +x +1\text{,}\)</li>
              <li id="li-174">\(x^2 +x +2\text{,}\)</li>
              <li id="li-175">\(x^3 + x +1\text{,}\)</li>
              <li id="li-176">\(x^3 + x^2 + 1\text{,}\)</li>
              <li id="li-177">\(x^3 + x^2 + x + 1\text{.}\)</li>
            </ol>
          </li>
        </ol>
        <div class="solutions">
          <div class="solution solution-like" id="solution-30">
            <span class="type">Solution</span>
            <p id="p-580">TBD.</p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </article>
      <p id="p-581">As the following theorem illustrates, in \(F[x]\text{,}\) all irreducibles are primes.</p>
      <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="theorem-49">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Theorem</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.7</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-582">Let \(F\) be a field and \(p(x),f(x),g(x)\in F[x]\) such that \(p(x)\) is irreducible and \(p(x)\) divides \(f(x) g(x)\text{.}\) Then \(p(x)\) divides \(f(x)\) or \(p(x)\) divides \(g(x)\text{.}\)</p>
      </article>
      <article class="proof" id="proof-53">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-583">Assume \(p(x)\) does not divede \(f(x)\text{.}\) Then \(\gcd(p(x),f(x)=1\) and \(1=s(x)p(x)+t(x)f(x)\text{.}\) Multiplying by \(g(x)\) yields \(g(x)=g(x)s(x)p(x)+g(x)t(x)f(x)\) which implies that \(p(x)\) divides \(g(x)\) (since \(p(x)\) divides \(f(x)g(x)\)) .</p>
      </article>
      <p id="p-584">We next state the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra. Despite its name, its proof relies on analytic properties of the real numbers; there is no purely algebraic proof. Moreover, it is not essential for the work we do in following sections, but given its close relationship to the question of factorization, we include it here for completeness.</p>
      <article class="assemblage assemblage-like" id="ftalg">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="title">Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-585">Every nonconstant polynomial with coefficients in \(\C\) has a root in \(\C\text{.}\)</p>
      </article>
      <p id="p-586">We conclude with one consequence of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.</p>
      <article class="theorem theorem-like" id="theorem-50">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Theorem</span>
          <span class="space"> </span>
          <span class="codenumber">3.1.8</span>
          <span class="period">.</span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-587">Every nonconstant polynomial in \(\C[x]\) can be written as a product of linear polynomials.</p>
        <div class="hint solution-like" id="hint-14">
          <span class="type">Hint</span>
          <p id="p-588">What are the irreducibles in \(\C[x]\text{?}\)</p>
        </div>
      </article>
      <article class="proof" id="proof-54">
        <h6 class="heading">
          <span class="type">Proof<span class="period">.</span></span>
        </h6>
        <p id="p-589">Induction on degree of polynomial using previous theorem.</p>
      </article>
      <p id="p-590">Thus, the multiplicative structure of \(\C[x]\) is straightforward: everything can be factored as a product of linear polynomials. Fields of coefficients like \(\C\) for which this is true are said to be <dfn class="terminology">algebraically closed</dfn>; not all fields satisfy this property. For instance, \(x^2 + 1\in \R[x]\) does not factor into a product of linear polynomials. Consequently, \(\R\) is not algebraically closed.</p>
      <p id="p-591">However, regardless of whether our field is algebraically closed, we have not yet determined that any \(p\in F[x]\) can be factored uniquely into a product of irreducibles, or even that such factorizations into irreducibles exist. In <a href="SubSec-Factorization-in-Euclidean-Domains.xhtml" class="internal" title="Section 3.2: Factorization in Euclidean Domains">Section 3.2</a>, we do just that.</p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>
